So, how do people even get jobs in this field?
You could think, okay, is it because they're skilled at deconstructing the Christian religion?
I know.
It's in service to largely the academic world that we call New Testament studies is in
service to Western sacred history.
They're custodians of that, they're custodians of that in so many ways.
These texts were targeting the broader Mediterranean work and you know, that seems beyond dispute
really, but the problem is that there's little work being done to try and contextualize it
within that world and it's a giant wave and to use the analogy, the Christians, they've
got their surfboards out and they're riding the wave but they're not the only ones on
the wave and it re-inscribes the myth of the evolution of Western sacred history that
we evolved out of this like orgy of madness because Christianity came on the scene.
I got to the point when I was writing it, I started to, in my mind, I was having all
of these arguments with all of the supposed leading scholars of our time, there were New
Testament folks and I got to the point where it was just maddening, I just thought, you
know what, that's a waste.
This is actually putting at risk the future, it's an existential threat by, you know, by
possible relation, it produces certain existential threats to our own species in some ways.
To not have clarity on these issues is embarrassing.
Dr. Richard C. Miller is a transdisciplinary research scholar exploring the cultural and
literal nexus between classical antiquity and the social origins of earliest Christianity.
His published work focuses on the mythological roots of the New Testament gospel, the portraitures
of Jesus, the sacralized founding figure of the Christian religion.
Miller undertook his graduate work at Talbot School of Theology, Masters of Divinity, Princeton
Theological Seminary, Yale University, and Claremont Graduate University where he got
his PhD.
This discussion is going to be very controversial.
Your favorite Bible scholar might get dissed whether he's a liberal or conservative, we
don't care.
Are they correct?
Are they bringing the sources?
Are they looking at the data?
We're going to talk about that in this video.
Stay tuned.
And welcome back to the Gnostic Conformant and you are about to attain true gnosis.
Today I'm with Richard C. Miller and you just saw in the intro there, he's got some books
available in the description, we're going to talk about that stuff.
For example, like the one that we're discussing the most, Resurrection and Reception and Early
Christianity, great book.
I just want to get right into the main thing that I want to discuss and we're going to
branch out in different directions when we start talking about this is what is the cultural
milieu that Christianity sort of comes out of.
And it almost seems like you're having, there's one story that you get from tradition.
And then there's another story when you look at the evidence and it seemed to not really,
there's some overlap obviously, but there's something different going on there.
And that's what I want to get into this about.
Is Christianity just a pure offshoot of Judaism in its sense that it claims to be, or is there
other cultural aspects in the broader Mediterranean world that are playing parts in this?
Yeah, I think probably as I've thought about this question for quite a while, as you can
imagine having, you know, gone through my book there and I am staking out a position
with regard to that, that I feel very strongly about.
So it's not an accident that you're asking me this question, Neil.
I would first like to point out that I think there's a tendency going into this.
I think it's a bias that comes into it.
And it's mostly because where do people enter this discussion, usually from a faith background
presented within certain contexts that are interested in training people within their
religious kind of worldview, right?
And so from an academic standpoint, though, I think we need to make a distinction between
the setting in the narrative, like say in the Gospels, what's the setting?
Well, it's Palestine, it's Judea, it's Jerusalem, it's Galilee, it's Samaria, it's these places, right?
And the literary context, well, that's the area where you get all of the cultural fabric,
the linguistic content that's going into this.
Who are the readers and what's their world that they're living in?
What are they swimming in?
Linguistically, culturally.
And those are two very different questions, but they get conflated heavily in New Testament scholarship.
And I think there are a number of reasons for that and we can get into that in this interview.
I know we want to hit on that further in the discussion here.
But just enough to say that these texts were targeting the broader Mediterranean work.
And that seems beyond dispute, really.
But the problem is that there's little work being done to try and contextualize it within that world.
And so there's a sense of trying to sequester it off into Judaism and to see Judaism as if early Christianity were a sect of Judaism
and as if Judaism itself were somehow siloed off culturally from the rest of the broader Mediterranean world at that time.
That's such a good point that I want to highlight that because I think this is where the problem starts.
Judaism as a religion, it develops just like every other religion does, just like every other cultural entity or association or classia, whatever you want.
All these are different associations, Orphism, Pythagoreanism, Platonism, Paganism, whatever that means, like the local mystery cults and all that stuff.
And over in Jerusalem, you have another development and we call it Judaism today.
But this comes out of the same Mediterranean or, I should say, in the broader Middle Eastern world going towards the Babylonians.
And they're drawing from all the same cultural milios and it's the same process happening just in this part of the world.
So I think the biggest mistake we make is we draw a border around Israel and say that's monotheism, that's Judaism, and everyone else is Pagan.
And there's a dichotomy and it's like, it's so wrong to say that, by the way, no one called themselves Pagans, no one.
That's like a derogatory term that happens later, it means like hellbilly, it means like you're a hellbilly, you're not educated, you don't have the Christian faith, you're an idiot, you're a Pagan.
That's not, Paganism doesn't exist, it's just, you have these different cults in different cities, different priesthoods, and they're all drawing from the same cultural stuff.
They all do the same bull sacrifices, they all do the same lamb sacrifices, they all do the same type of oracle systems and they'll have like, temples built the same way.
It's all this, it's like there really is no division happening.
So I wanted to highlight that and I'll let you continue on what you're saying.
Oh yeah, so under the draft within the crucible of say, the Maccabean period, that's when you get the different sects of Judaism rising and it starts to fragment or fracture out into all of these different kind of manifestations or brands or types or permutations.
And let me say something about that too, and people get mad when I cut off people, but this is such a big thing right here, because yes, in the Maccabean period, you're seeing them, you're seeing them push themselves,
push themselves away from the broader Hellenization world, even though they're all named, even though they all have Hellenized names like Jason Maccabean, let's put that aside for now, let's put that aside for now, let's say, okay, they reject all these other cults.
Well, so have you read Plato's Republic, where he says all these different Homeric and Hesiod themes are teaching children to be bad people and we need a better, more up to date type of religion.
And then even beyond Platonism, even beyond the philosophical sects, in Rome in 186 BCE, they were horrified at the Bacchic priesthoods that were surrounding Rome.
And they outlawed the Bacchic cult.
And by the way, Maccabees, the God that they're going up against is Dionysus, specifically, I think Zeus too, but they were talking about the Dionysian procession coming in from Antiochus.
So to me, that's no different than the Romans outlawing Bacchus, and what's the difference there?
There's no difference to me.
So I think it becomes what happens is they're all drawn from the same cultural stuff.
But then once you become your own priesthood, your own entity, that's when you take on an individual role and say it's us versus them type of thing.
But that's not to say that they're like a different planet or they need to have a force field around them and that they can't draw from these other cultural ideas.
That's, you know, and I just wanted to point that out.
What are your thoughts on that?
Well, yeah, so you have the Alexander's Conquest to the East, right?
And you have the different kingdoms that split off from that, that you've got, you know, the Seleucids and Ptolemies, et cetera.
And the Seleucid Empire is basically that's occupying the region that we would consider to be the stomping ground of the New Testament later under Roman governance.
But prior to that, it was, and that's where you get Antiochus Epiphanes and the story in two Maccabees about the martyrs and their resistance to the tyrant.
It's, it's causing the tyrant multiple times.
It's a political resistance largely.
When you get to the Pharisees, you, I mean, they're described even in the New Testament as having embraced a lot of Persian ideas.
You've got demons and apocalypse and resurrection and angels and all sorts of things that are that would be occultic in some ways to a pure kind of idea that you're rising out of classical Hebrew tradition.
And so they're more open-minded, a lot more, actually.
In fact, that's kind of the banner under which they're, they're marching in some ways is that that's their, their posture to all that.
There's the temple that continues to be contested through that period.
And so the Maccabean literature, we have it in Greek, right, which is, that should say enough right there, what's going on.
But there's, there's a tendency to want to convert the temple to Jerusalem, Jerusalem to a temple that's conflates the two deities, Zeus and Yahweh.
They're both mountain deities, the sky deities that are kind of principle and in those different cultures and to try and see the, and if you read against the grain in the Maccabean literature, there was a massive resistance within Judaism against those that were resisting Hellenization.
And so there was pro and, and, you know, there, there, there were, there were those that were in favor and those that were against that.
And some of them wanted to have their city revamped and, and with portugos and colonnades and, and all of the, you know, gymnasia and all of the nice cities of a modern Greek city, you know, they wanted that for their own people.
And, and understandably, and they were open minded to the idea of syncretizing with classical Greek or, you know, Hellenistic, even religious forms, even, even seeing Zeus and Yahweh.
As synonymous to that extent.
And in fact, in Samaria, it succeeds that temple.
If you go back and actually read the Maccabean literature, that the temple where Jesus was also Messiah, you know, when he went to the woman of the well and all that, you know, he was their Messiah to their temple was dedicated to Zeus Yahweh.
Yeah. And Demetrius, Demetrius Philarium, when he wrote that letter to the, I forgot who it was, the high priest, I think it was the high priest.
He says, yeah, you, we call him Zeus, you call him, you call him, whatever, I think he says Yahweh, I can't remember, but it's, it's the, it's the letter that's that Josephus relates.
And it's right before they do the Septuagint translation, he's saying, yeah, you know, your laws are very, very noble and very divine and we were all the same, we're all on the same boat, we, yeah, Zeus, we call him life, Xena, we call him the same as you guys.
And so you can see that sort of thing happening.
And another thing, and you mentioned the gymnasium as an abomination mentioned in Maccabees, but Plato's laws specifically call out gymnasiums as being places where evil happens and children are, you know, homosexuality comes, like, all this, he sort of like says, we need to get rid of these gymnasiums, or we should have them, but they should be really regulated, there's some sort of thing like that.
And it's like, there's an prime example, like you can see, this is something that's developing across the board, where people are, it's like the sort of movement of piety, I call it, like where people are sort of growing out of the, the orgy, you know, the orgy, orgy of religions of, of the ancient world, because those are pretty prominent.
So some of these, uh, Bacchic sex, but it's not just Judaism that's doing this, it's all, all across the board, you're seeing the Orphics, you're seeing the Platonists, the Pythagoreans, and they're all sort of adopting this, well, we should be humble and pious, and we should reject the bodily, bodily pleasures.
And this is sort of a movement that's not, it's happening just across the board in general, and I don't see it just happening in one space.
Yes, the early Christians did not define that, that's the ascetical eschasis, you might want to, you know, that's one way to describe it, and then it comes out of the philosophical tradition, it's a giant wave, and to use the analogy, the Christians, they've got their surfboards out and they're riding the wave, but they're not the only ones on the wave.
They're not defining the wave, they are in some ways taking it to certain extremes through certain manifestations, like Marverdon and these kind of things, but they're not even unique in that.
And so, um, ascetical kind of a disposition that had become very popular, in fact, Veronica Grimm, under whom I studied on the East Coast there, she wrote a book from feasting to fasting, and it basically traces that trajectory from the Homeric period,
all the way into late antiquity, where attitudes regarding, you know, self-discipline and, you know, constraints, self-restraint, austerity, fasting, and the emancipation of that, but it's shown in all sorts of ways, and largely is falling from the classical philosophical traditions.
And so, there's a kind of a polarity there that's going on between, they're criticizing, the philosophers are criticizing a lot of the classical mythological forms, and you know, the indulgence of Zeus is just, you know, they're becoming critics in some ways of that,
you know, of course, trying to thread that line carefully, not to get themselves into too much trouble, but that's where they're coming from in that, and Christianity arises within that, and is itself a product of that larger conversation and contestation that's going on in antiquity.
This is my, okay, this is what I want to get into, because this is my, someone who's not an expert, I'm just a big nerd, and I love reading about this stuff.
As, in the same way a nerd of Star Wars would get mad about the new Star Wars movie not being politically correct compared to like the, the canon or whatever, you know, I can sort of relate to that as like someone who's a really nerdy about ancient history and mythology and religions,
whereas I'm thinking, why aren't some of these focuses being, some of these areas of study being focused on more by New Testament scholarship, it's only, I'm only seeing it in classicists, and specific like Egyptologists or, you know,
you know, Thraciologists that study the origin of Thrace, and like, and I've brought up Thraciologists because there's a scholar, Rujapapava, and PhD at the Institute of Balkan Studies and Center of Thracology, and this person writing all these articles about this religion coming
from the Hellenistic region, from the 4th century BC, all through the 1st century, even beyond that, these Ipsisterian people who are worshiping God Most High, and they don't, they don't care about circumcision of the Mosaic laws, but they mingle with Jews, like there's evidence that they're, that they're friends with, they're friendly with the Jews, they like them, they like their scriptures a little bit,
but they're not like, then we don't care about circumcision, we don't have images of God, we just worship God, and he's just like this, he's just like this idea, and it's almost like the Platonist God coming, coming forth in this religion, and then you have them, then they find out in these inscriptions, they call themselves Seboi Manoi, or Theosabes, God-fearers, this is what they call themselves, the titles they, these are the people that Paul are writing to in his letters,
and not even that, Seboi Manoi is who he addresses in this, in the narrative of Acts, so whoever wrote that, whoever wrote that is making Paul address them in that narrative, so I'm thinking, now I'm not, that doesn't necessarily mean they are Ipsisterians, but I'm, what I'm, what I'm gathering is that at the very least, there's an overlap between the cultural religious attitudes of Thrace and Phrygia, modern-day Turkey,
by the way, where Christianity explodes, where the Church of Constantinople is, this is where they move the capital, this is where the Church Fathers of Bithynia, that little area of Bithynia, that's the first time Christianity's mentioned by Plain of the Younger, so we're talking about Christianity seems like more of a development of northern Turkey, southern Thrace, than it is for Israel,
yes, and this is my concern, I want to hear your thoughts on this, why is it that people are, maybe they are, maybe I'm just not seeing it, but why is it that it seems like we're not looking at the developments of this region, and how they come out of this region, rather than trying to see it as like this Jewish offshoot?
Yeah, that's all great question, well, first off, I think with all the people you've been talking to on your show, great show by the way, Neil, you've had some of the world, the top world experts on here, I'm honored to be a guest,
you know, we all probably need to get together and give you, award you with like an honorary doctorate or something like that, you know, or more than many of the people that claim to know so much in our field, and so just a little, yeah, no, it's great to have a conversation, you could run with the best in these conversations, and so it's more than just a Star Wars fan at this point, I think for you, yeah,
so I think you're absolutely correct, why aren't we studying the hell out of Bethany, why aren't we studying the hell out of Macedonia and Rome, and the cultural hubs where this religion caught fire and just ignited, why aren't those largely rejected in Jerusalem?
Judah is largely unaffected by the rise of Christianity, you could make a case to the contrary, but it'd be pretty puny and scanty that the Judaism was largely, you know, had the rise of Christianity had this massive impact on Judaism, it absolutely was, it was a full scale cultural revolution, though, in the Greco-Roman world.
That's where these texts are getting traction, that's where they're being marketed, that's where they're being written, that's where they're being consumed, that's where the religion is taking off, that's where these texts are targeting those contexts and are the earliest evidence.
When you look at Paul, where's he at? Is he hanging out writing stuff in Hebrew in Jerusalem? No, he's almost indistinguishable from like an itinerant philosopher in his own right, almost like a, I don't know, an occultic middle Platonist kind of running around with his own cultic conceptions, largely untethered to Judaism.
He doesn't not see himself and the earliest Christians are abrogating, they're abrogating, they're giving up nearly every separatist practice that Judaism had claimed at that time.
They're giving up circumcision, they're giving up, you know, eating separately, they're giving up, you go down the list and part of the gist or even importance of this literature is that letting go of each one of those pieces, right?
And so, and that the mission has shifted to the Gentile, you know, so to speak, the nations, the ethnic, and so that's the narrative that's going on early on and then in the earliest evidence of the Christian tradition or traditions.
And so that should be what we're studying. And it's written, these are texts that are written in Greek that are playing on and riffing on and trying to create their own adaptations of the larger within the larger Hellenistic world.
And this isn't unique to Christianity. If you go down to Egypt, they're doing the same thing like Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt.
They've got their own Hellenistic forms that are built on top of their more ancient forms there.
If you go to Palmyra or Edessa or any of these other places where Christianity also took off, these are also syncretic areas where you'll find all sorts of amalgams between those different cultural, the cultural hardware that was available at the time.
And Christianity, as it took off in other directions, like say Nestorianism or Manichaeanism, highly syncretic. These are traditions of Christianity that ventured out into the East and flourished there and whatnot.
And those are highly syncretic that are hybrid with traditions in those directions, like for instance Buddhism. If you go to Manichaeanism, it's got Buddhist ideas in it, it's got Indic ideas in it, it's got Persian ideas into it in it and Parthian and so forth.
And so you've got the tradition that's going toward Rome, that's the one that we have mostly preserved, at least in evidence in our New Testament.
And lo and behold, it is syncretic toward the classical Greco-Roman forms and the Roman Hellenistic period.
And so that's the bedrock underneath this and those are the hardware on which this software is being ran, so to speak.
If you want to look at that as an analogy, the New Testament, the earliest Christian cult that's preserved in that trajectory toward Rome, that software that's running on the classical Mediterranean hardware at the time.
People that were in Corinth, were they deeply steeped in Judaism? No.
Even when you, I brought this up in a separate interview, but when you look at the first major successful gospel, we want to call it that, Mark.
If you dig in there, the Jews are mentioned in the third person and they're criticized throughout the text in so many ways, right?
And this is not a flattering for a picture of Judaism at the time, for the most part. It's a fairly scathing critique across it in many ways.
Even Matthew gets sort of labeled as the most Jewish of all.
Even Matthew was kind of picking on the Jews a little bit.
And you also have Magi following a star, right?
That's not Jewish. So even the most Jewish gospel of all has some problems with it.
And then you look at like, what are the Jews saying about Christianity?
They're going to read some of these mission attacks.
They're not very friendly towards the Christians either.
So the evidence you show is they're friction there.
They're not overlapping and they're not friendly with each other.
They don't even consider the Christians as fellow Jews, I don't think.
Right. Now, obviously we would see Paul as coming out of Judaism and other really cult leaders and founders and stuff in some way.
But also early on, you see a lot of others that are jumping in and some of the writers, even in the New Testament, who's Luke?
Is that a devout Jew from Jerusalem?
Well, I don't think so. And I don't think Mark was either.
It was a traveling companion that jumped in later.
Again, he describes them in the third person and then has to explain Judaism in these glosses throughout the text.
He stops at one point and he says, oh, and by the way, the Jews, when they eat, they need to wash their pots and pans
and make sure and follow their purity practice because that's what they, you know, and he's giving this, you don't have to describe that to Jewish people.
And that borders on an insult to them.
If this is a text primarily targeting Jewish people, that's absurd.
Like I said on Derek's channel, that would be like trying to describe a football to professional football players.
Like it's a ridiculous thing.
It seems like, but I think we do have to mention that they are obviously drawing from Old Testament narratives and they're sort of making Jesus fulfill a lot of the stuff happening throughout, not just the Torah, but like even the prophets and stuff in Isaiah.
And they're taking all these themes from Isaiah and from Zechariah and from Moses and the story of Moses and Abraham.
And they're sort of putting it on the Jesus.
But that comes through the Septuagint, if I'm not mistaken.
There's no evidence that they're really using anything from the Hebrew side.
It's almost like it seems like they're pretty much just drawing from the Septuagint, which is a Greek text.
Yeah, yeah.
And I would go even further than that because they're spoon feeding that to their readers as if the readers weren't really steeped in it.
And, you know, they have to like lead them into these texts, into these kind of interpretations that they're giving, which we can get into just how valid those interpretations are.
Like the messianism that's in the New Testament, largely not embraced.
A lot of those concepts are not embraced in Judaism, but that's the way that they want to draw it up.
That's the form within the cult.
And this is the way it's being fed to early converts out in the Far Flung Empire in places like Corinth and Ephesus, highly Hellenistic cities.
Hellenism was rampant in these cities.
And these were the, it's almost like in New Testament studies, it's supposed that the early converts were dropped in from some unimaginably alien place.
And we're just finding all of this completely, you know, befuddling, you know, like, what are all these people doing?
No, they had been swimming in this for generations.
These were the people that lived in these cities.
And Hellenism was, that was the way of it.
And so it wasn't, it wasn't a decision, it wasn't Jewish or Hellenism.
It was, Jews were variously also dedicated to Hellenism.
So it wasn't God of me.
Let me jump in on that for a second, because I think a good example that gives us a big picture of what some of these more Hellenized Jews were thinking is Philo.
Philo of Alexandria.
And he explicitly says, all right, so this is the, this works.
Now, I'm going to, I'm going to, I'm going to admit, I'm going to tweak one of the words he has here.
I think I would translate it differently.
And he uses the word logos.
He transits it as reason.
But I'm going to change the logos because I think it, I want people to hear it for what it sounds like in the Greek.
It's called, it's Philo.
It's called on creation.
And people want to look this up on creation X 36.
He says the incorporeal world.
This is very Platonist.
When you hear that incorporeal, incorporeal, this is all, Plato loves these types of language, by the way.
So already, when you hear the word incorporeal, you're like, okay, Plato thinking of Platonism.
Incorporeal world was already completed having its seat in the divine logos and the world perceptible by the external senses was made on the model of it.
And the first portion of it being also the most excellent of all made by the creator was the heaven, which he truly called the firmament.
As being corporal for the body is by nature firm in so much that it's divisible into three parts and whatever the other idea of solidity and the body can there be except that it is something which may be measured in every direction.
Therefore, he very naturally contrasting that was perceptible to the external senses in the corporal with that which was perceptible by the intellect and the incorporeal calls this the firmament.
Now, if you read that, if there wait, he says divine reason, which it's correct reason logos.
I guess you can say that.
But I would have kept the word logos.
Because now all of a sudden, you're like, wait, the gods creating the world incorporeal and incorporeal through his logos.
That's what it sounds like.
It almost sounds like maybe John might be drawing from this or something similar.
Maybe if it's not phylo, maybe this idea is floating around in the world and in the Hellenized Jewish world.
And this is very plateness, by the way, incorporeal, incorporeal.
By the way, there's another passage in here where he says the three parts are incorporeal, corporal and spiritual.
And you're like, that has so much Trinitarian stuff floating around in that sentence.
Because like corporal, which is the corporal, which is flesh, incorporeal, the father and then spiritual Holy Spirit.
Like you're like, what is this where this Trinity comes from?
I'm just like throwing ideas out there.
I could be wrong.
I don't know.
But the reason why I wanted to bring this part up is because here's a prime example of a Jewish philosopher who's completely Jewish to the core.
No doubt about it.
He loves Moses.
He loves the laws.
He loves Abraham.
Read phylo.
It's Jewish.
He's not a pagan or whatever, pagan or whatever you want to call it.
But he's also very Platonist.
He loves Plato.
He says Plato is divinely inspired in this book.
So this is a prime example.
Somebody living in Alexandria, who's writing in Greek, who's relating Jewish ideas, but through the Hellenistic philosophy lens of middle Platonism and Stoicism.
Well, that's exactly what you described it to a T.
That's exactly what's going on there.
He's creating a fashionable kind of rendition of revamping Judaism in some ways within the structures of the philosophical world at that time.
Presenting himself as a sort of Jewish philosopher that's on the par with or at least could have respectability within that context.
Alexandria was was a major center, you know, rival Athens in terms of its philosophical schools and sophistication and reputation and Judaism.
In that context, there were different forms, obviously, but he represents in some ways the height of that in at least in terms of one writer that survives from that time, one thinker.
And yeah, he is bringing forward his place drawing on the classical philosophical tradition and in many ways showing his religion to be sophisticated and and and able to be conveyed through that lens as you described it.
The the Demiurgos, the Timaeus and Plato's Timaeus.
Firstly, one thing that's missing is, you know, maybe we need to take all of Plato's works and just blew them onto the bottom of our, our new testum or something like that.
Just so everyone knows.
I've been saying that significant and important and and defining those works were to the psyche and the intellectual, the kind of the top thinkers of that time.
I'm actually surprised that New Testament seminarians don't have to replay though or Greek at all.
That you think this would be mandatory.
I mean, it's like, it's like, imagine trying to understand economics and not doing math.
Right.
Exactly. Exactly.
Exactly. You know, it's not not even just Plato, but all of them.
I mean, if you go over to it, you should, they should also glue Homer to the bottom of everyone's duty.
Every every convert to this religion knew the works of Homer.
They might not have known it, you know, verbatim as a memorized text, but they were steeped in it and they were immersed in this, just like you spoke of Star Wars earlier.
This, this was so much more important to them than our Star Wars.
And, and so the idea that we're not studying the literary world of the ancient mind that the earliest converts that were coming into this, how were they thinking when they, when they came into this religion?
It's almost like it's thought that, that somebody just erased the entire hard drive and, you know, put Christianity on there.
And that's just not how human beings work.
It's not how any culture works.
Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's not realistic.
And so Euripides would be another one that is just towering canonical.
He see it. Another one towering canonical set of texts that come from his, his, his works there, works in days and theogony.
Those should all be required reading for anyone that claims to be delving into.
Especially theology as a, if you're, if you're, if you're a theology degree, PhD in theology, you should have to know this stuff.
I think, just me, just personally.
I think it's like very, I don't think I'm asking too much because theology is a Greek word that comes from the Platonist.
The first theologian was Orpheus.
He was called Orpheus the theologian.
And he, by the way, he was also called an apocalypse, a revealer.
So you have all this terminology that you get in Christianity coming from the Orphic Platonist world.
And like you, how many people who had PhDs in theology don't even know that.
Don't even know what your degree means.
No, it is, it's absurd.
You kind of wonder, what are they studying?
You know, I brought this up, I brought this up many times, actually.
That's part of the whole reason it's the, the, the, the discursive constraints is one, I've got a section in the book where I explore that.
And that's part of the scandal of this whole field really is the, the arbitrary lines and walls that have been built up.
They're relics, they're, they're leftovers from a Christian medieval scholastic kind of world that dominated.
That's where we get our whole Western academic kind of structure is out of that world in some ways, the modern discourse in New Testament studies.
I hate to say it, but it really is almost the last holdout of the dark ages in some ways in terms of trying to investigate these things with the kind of rigor that we would place on any other subject matter.
Secular academics have not been governing this discourse.
We're not defining it.
We are not in control of kind of the, the primary description of, of, of what early Christianity was and how it got off the ground.
We are, we are at best marginal voices that are drawn into question often for, it's almost suspicious.
We're seeing it as we must be up to something, you know, we must.
I've heard classes when I bring up New Testament studies and they just go, whatever, like, all right, let's talk about it.
It's like, it's like something, I don't know, I'm not going to be rude, but anyways, there's some brilliant New Testament scholars out there.
So I don't want to make it sound like I'm like, stop, like I'm better than anybody.
I'm not, I'm just some random guy.
I'm just pointing out what I'm noticing.
Okay.
But this is some of the stuff that frustrates me.
And you mentioned there's these dogmas that are very present in biblical stuff, scholarship.
And one of those is like this like allergic knee jerk reaction to anybody trying to draw from the outside to them.
It's outside the broader Mediterranean world.
And then like, for example, Dennis McDonald, I can't tell you how many times I've heard people say Dennis McDonald is Parallelomania.
And I'll say, Oh, so which, which, which of his books did you read?
Well, I didn't read it.
I just heard that.
I can't tell you how many times I've heard people say this, I'm not going to drop names here.
But I'm, but people, some of these people listening right now are going to know that I'm talking about them.
Because I've had these conversations with them and said, Dennis McDonald's Parallelomania.
Oh, really?
So you know, Greek, you read Homer, you've read Hesiod, you've read Aripides, you've read, you've read Aeschylus, and you've read Dennis's books.
And now you, what's your, let me hear why Dennis, well, I haven't even read any of that stuff.
I just, this is just what I've heard.
Yeah.
But why would you even say that?
Just say you don't even, you don't know if Dennis is correct.
I have to look into it.
Wouldn't that be the correct thing to do?
Wouldn't that be the rigorous, honest thing to say?
Hey, I heard Dennis, Dennis, Dennis's book goes a little far, but me personally, I don't know Homer.
I don't know, uh, uh, uh, Euripides, Bacchae.
I don't even know Greek.
So I'm not going to weigh in on that.
I'm just going to, I'm just telling you what I heard.
I'm like, okay, I respect that answer.
But the first thing he said was it's Parallelomania.
Christianity is a niche religion, man.
That's what they said.
That's what he said.
And I've heard, it's not just, this is, I've heard this from like five different New Testament scholars that I've talked to.
They're saying Dennis is, eh, now I'm not saying Dennis is like omniscient and everyone needs to like bow to his work and like know his stuff.
But I am saying like at least know the material that is coming from.
And he points out, some of the stuff that he points out that's indisputable in my opinion is the practice of you training people to learn Greek by copying Homer in Euripides.
So he points out, look, the people who wrote the Gospels most likely better, better chance than not have were trained in learning the classics like Homer in Euripides.
That's right.
It's, it's for lack of training in that field.
It's mostly people having, well, they, so how do people even get jobs in this field?
You could look back up the whole thing and think, okay, is it, is it because they're skilled at deconstructing the Christian religion?
Is that, is that how you become successful in this field?
And no, it's, it's in service to largely the academic world that we call New Testament studies is in service to Western sacred history.
They're custodians of that.
They're custodians of that in so many ways.
And so, and I, and I say them because I don't want to even, I, I, I pride myself on my electoral honesty.
And you really do have to go back and study all that to even draw a conclusion that's worth listening to.
You'd have to go back and actually take a deep immersive study of the canonicity of Homer in antiquity.
Would you just how important mimesis was in the writing policies of the time?
This was standard for people to, to imitate Homer in their narratives was standard.
This wasn't just, this isn't just make Dennis McDonald off on the side, having some kind of whack theory.
This is as the result of an entire field, neglecting the literary world of antiquity.
Yeah.
And John, the way John is written, the way John is written is like, I don't know how you can't come away with it as a tragedy.
Right.
The way it's written, the way the characters are presented, the secrets of events, all the stuff that lines up with other tragedies.
And so does John, it should fit, it's like, just like any other tragedy does.
You could almost take, I mean, here's one way to look at it.
You could almost take, if you were to say, let's, let's, let's take a project here.
You were to take, say the Elijah, Elisha cycle in classical Hebrew tradition, those stories of, you know, the healings and going about in the axe head and all that stuff.
Here to take that, just the kind of episodic vignettes that are in that.
And say, put in a bowl and mix that with Homer.
Just mix all that together into one kind of combo.
You would get something that is in pretty close proximity to the Gospels.
Right.
If you got to that point now, I'm not saying that explains the entire thing, but just that ought to be telling all in its own right, you know, that you've got, and you're right.
No one is that very, very few in our field that sat down with Dennis's work and actually read what he's, he's written there.
It's compelling there.
You can't.
I think he's too careful.
I like me personally, I would go farther than he goes.
He's very careful on things that he presents as what you would say speculation or his, his hypotheses.
He's not just throwing out stuff at the wall with sticks.
We and him have talked on the phone and I would say, but what about this passage that like sounds like this or whatever?
And he'll go, I think you're being too speculative.
He's, he's way careful or more careful than people give him credit for.
He really is.
It's true.
Now I did my PhD under him and he's a fantastic mentor and he guided me in a wonderful way.
And he's still somebody that guides me.
I still have breakfast with him frequently.
We live in the same community here and in the greater LA area and Claremont near the colleges here.
And I have a lot of wonderful conversations with him.
He is one of those people that has made a profound and really fundamental radical contribution to this field that goes still undiscovered.
And it's mostly because of these dynamics.
Paganism.
What is Paganism?
Why are we even using that term at this point?
It's an acronym for earliest Christianity.
No one was talking about the earliest Christians as Pagans at that time or outside of the early Christians being Pagans at that time.
It's, it should never be used in an academic setting and any more than the Hick or any other derogatory word, the N word.
You know, I don't mean to bring that into this, but it's a nasty word that's meant to create a version.
And it, and it re, it re-inscribes the myth of the evolution of Western sacred history that we evolved out of this like orgy of madness because Christianity came on the scene.
Right.
Which is so false.
You're so right though.
That's the impression you get from a lot of people in the New Testament studies realm is that there's the Greek Pagan world and they're all doing worshipping idols and, you know, sacrificing goats and just, just ignore what happens in the Old Testament.
Forget about that stuff.
It's just, it's only them doing, right?
And then, but then they go even farther.
And it's like, there, there's a separate border across the Pagans and these pious Christians that were, there were, these poor people were, were persecuted by these, these Romans that were, you know, worshipping Caesar.
And it's like, it's way more, it's simplifying.
It's so much that it sounds like a fairy tale.
Right.
And when you use that word Pagan, you're already, what you're doing is you just jumped into a dogma.
And now it's, as soon as you use that word to describe the other, you, what you've done is you've limited yourself to understand the broader Mediterranean world.
And you, now you're operating within a dogma that was created by the church in later times.
So you're, you're all, without even realizing it, you're now operating within the dogmas of the church.
Even if you don't even want to, you are.
Right, right.
And that's, I mean, this, this happens elsewhere as well.
I mean, you can go into, you know, who were the barbarians, you know, like the, the, the, the, the victor rarely gets to paint the, I mean, the, the, the, the, the vanquished rarely get to paint the picture of their own history.
Right. It's, it's written by others.
And strangely enough, you can go back the evidence, the literary evidence for the Roman world is giant.
You go back and read some of these people.
Brilliant.
Go read Cicero.
You know, go read a virtual, go read any of these individuals.
Not one of them should be given the indignity of being referred to as a pagan.
Especially when you read Cicero's On the Nature of the Gods, the dialogue he has, he has a stoic dialogue with a priest and a somewhat Platonist or something.
And they're, they're going, it's like a very, you could, this book is so important to me because it highlights in the first century,
BC, it highlights that this conversation was being had about superstition.
And Christianity is, gets credited for being the sort of step up from being superstitious, even though it's very superstitious too.
Hope still comes out in January.
And he checks this like, gel or goo.
And if it's solid, it means it's going to be bad omens.
And if it's, if it's liquid, it's a good omen.
Did you know about this?
This still happens, this just happened in 2024 in January.
Oh my goodness.
So the idea that they're not superstitious, but anyways, that's a, that's another top.
But they, Christianity gets credited as being like, we're not as superstitious as these other pagans are.
And it's almost like, but that movement started before Christianity even was on anyone's tongue.
Read Cicero.
Read, even before, let's go back even farther.
This, the, the pre-Socratics, Heraclitus, in one of his fragments, Heraclitus has said, these people are worshiping idols and talking to them like they're real.
You don't know anything about the gods.
So there's that, that, that, that boat already sailed.
That movement of like, looking, looking past superstitions and being more prop, being more pragmatic about, about the divine.
That already, that's already a thing that's been 500 years in the making.
Right.
In some ways you could look at Christianity.
I mean, it's, you could, there's nothing really new about Christianity.
It's, it's just, it's, it's new in its configuration.
It's new and it's in that way that it's kind of like the automobile.
We had entrance, we had doors, we had windows, we had steering wheels.
We had all that stuff.
And now it comes together a certain way.
Not that Christianity was this great invention or anything.
It's its own odd jumble of goods.
But no, these weren't, this wasn't a new innovation.
In fact, when it came onto the scene, it was considered a pernicious superstition.
That's, that's how, that was the natural reaction.
It was looking at it.
Yeah.
And so dangerous, deadly even, I think in, in Tacitus, he refers to as a deadly superstition.
Right.
Which is so, which is so funny how they credit themselves as being the, the religion that
got us away from all those superstitious pagans.
But like, you read, you read the contemporary sources of the time period and they're the
ones getting called that.
So there's obviously, it's obviously way more complicated than that.
And it's presented like in this very fairy tale like manner is that this, this Christianity
religion against all odds was, you know, came up in the, and just miraculously became the
religion of the entire, you know, Roman society.
But like, you can see it's way more complicated than that.
And there's way more moving parts happening.
And there's, there's, there's Platonism and middle Platonism and philosophy involved behind
the scenes and a lot of these different early Christian sex, like the so-called Gnostics.
When you read their texts, it's very, it's very, they're like, they're, they're, they're,
some of these sex, the, for example, the Carpacrations, they had images of Plato and
Cyrus next to Jesus.
So you're seeing like all these different movements coming out of philosophical traditions influencing
theology.
So what I'm noticing is as philosophy progresses, theology follows behind it.
That's what it seems like is going on.
Yeah.
Your thoughts on that.
Well, I think that part of it is just the way people think.
And so what, what are people doing?
I mean, you're, we're talking about the discourse at this point.
Like why, why isn't this being talked about?
Why isn't this the in-depth exploration?
The, the, why isn't this the all-consuming or primarily consuming project for New Testament
work?
Why is, what, well, why are people, what is the New Testament in the mind and psyche of
our culture at this time?
It is a bridge, a possible bridge.
It presents a hope that possibly something beyond the natural exists, some, some kind
of extra thing that maybe we can survive death, maybe, and, and so people are looking to this
religion in that way.
And so it's theologically tethered.
And so the discussion in that way, you know, exploring, it's a lot of work.
You want to, you know, if you had to as a New Testament, and this is kind of what I had
to do.
My, my work was transdisciplinary.
I did like three master's degree programs and I had to study classics and I took all
sorts of classics courses under classics, secular professors all over the place.
And as you'll see there, my, my book was basically a reworking of my dissertation.
I had three of my four dissertation committee members were classicists.
They, you know, they could care less about the New Testament in so many ways.
And so that's hard to get into their world and to become impressive in their world in
terms of understanding, getting to a point where you can truly understand the classical
Mediterranean world.
And all of its, I mean, in some ways Judaism is, is by comparison, appears at least from
my standpoint, like a tide pool compared sitting next to this vast sea that you have to learn
and master and become immersed in in order to even feel like you understand what you're
doing in that world.
And so the more and more we do that, of course, the scandal is, is that it's not even like
you would think people would put the flippers on and go swimming in that sea occasionally
and at least make an effort.
Right.
And like I was talking to Derek the other day about Corinthians, first and second Corinthians.
Well, Cassanius goes there and he walks around and looks at Corin and gives a vivid description
of that.
I mean, flaxes at seminaries on the Corinthian correspondences.
Cassanius, I don't even think was mentioned.
Right.
Not even mentioned.
Like what were we doing?
I look back and I think what were we even talking about?
Like,
And by the way, he's a second century geographer.
Right.
See, that's a perfect source.
Exactly.
There's your archaeology for the ancient world, like from, from the sources standpoint, like
you, you're right.
He's walking around in the world that Christianity is growing in, at least middle second century
time.
He goes to Corinth.
He goes to all these different ethicists.
Right.
I'm pretty sure he went to ethicists.
But he's going all around the place and he's describing what's going on here.
By the way, speaking of Pausanius, Pausanius goes to a city.
I forgot where it is.
It's somewhere in central Greece where they have a temple of Dionysus.
And on the 5th of January, they take three jars of three empty jars and they leave them
out in the sanctuary.
And then the morning when they come in, they're filled with wine miraculously.
Get this, early Orthodox church.
This is, this is, I put this in one of my recent videos and I'm still wondering why this isn't
talked about.
There are, there are some scholars that wrote about this and they're in the classics world,
believe it or not.
But this is the early church, Orthodox church credits January 6th, the same day as the Epiphany
and the same day as the Magi gets celebrated on and his birthday to some, you know how
some Orthodoxy celebrates Christmas on January 6th.
But they also say this is the same day of the wedding at Cana.
Do you know this?
No.
And this is, Pausanias talks about this, this, this, this right that they perform where there's
a miracle every year.
And plainly younger, two second century sources that mentioned this particular festival of
Dionysus.
And you have, you have the wedding at Cana.
And that's just one example.
We talked about how in resurrections and Plutarch writes about this at length.
You and I were talking about this recently.
Plutarch starts naming off people who I haven't even heard of who supposedly died and their
bodies disappeared and they were assumed divinity because of this.
Yes.
What happens to Jesus?
He died, he gets put in a tomb and he disappears and he's assumed divine.
That's a, that's a Mediterranean motif in general.
Like that's, we're talking about the resurrection itself.
I just recently heard, I just recently heard, and I love this, this scholar, Dan McClellan.
I love Dan McClellan.
But whenever he, whenever he gets into like Greek influence on Christianity, he just rejects
it all outright.
He just, it's like he's allergic to it.
And I heard him just recently say this, there, you know, yeah, some of the stuff, some of
the Greek stuff that the Christians are modeling and using to write their texts, but it has
no, no influence on the Christian story or Christian tradition whatsoever.
And I'm just thinking the resurrection, the way the resurrection is described is a Hellenistic
motif that's all across the board.
Romulus.
Yeah.
Well, I've not read my book.
That's, yeah, that's the, if there isn't, that's the whole point and thrust of my book
is to lay that out in vivid detail.
The, that that, in fact, the earliest Christians admit as much.
That's their, they say this is what, and they interpret and receive that story in that way.
That's why it's resurrection and reception.
The, the reception of that story, the continuity, you could draw a through line from antiquity
straight through Christianity into its later forms and see just how it evolves straight
through that.
It's an anthropological kind of project.
New Testament scholars don't take anthropology.
They don't even know what it is.
No.
They have no idea where that is.
And this is the sad part.
Early Christians are willing to talk about that stuff more than scholars today.
Justin Marder, comparing Jesus to Hercules and Mithras and Dionysus and, and Mercury.
He's compared, he's throwing all these comparisons out there because he's trying to like talk to
his fellow Platonists that are, you know, that he wants to like, yeah, we're just like you guys.
You can take.
Now, Clement, Clement, Clement of Alexandria does this in his protracticus.
You have, what's his name?
Shit.
Epiphanius.
Epiphanius in the fifth century, when he writes the Panarion.
He's talking about gods that are being celebrated as their birthday at the Winter Solstice.
Right.
Jesus.
Like, well, how come early Christians are willing to go and do this type of comparison?
But scholars today who call themselves critical scholars won't want, don't want to go there.
Right.
Justin Marder.
I mean, that's how, that's why I kick off my book with him is because he's going there
in spades.
He's, that's his, his, he predicate.
In fact, he can't avoid that.
Any argument outside of that wouldn't have gotten gone anywhere at that in that world.
So he's having to go ahead and get honest about that this is the bedrock upon which the resurrection
story and so forth is today, there was a move.
Like if you go back a hundred years, a century, there was there, the scholarship was at least
in its best forms, moving pretty heavily into the, the classical Greek, Roman, Hellenistic
society at that time to contextualize earliest Christian thought and texts.
And so we see some of that.
And we talked about Arthur Darby.
He was about a century ago, exactly right now, actually, when he got his career going.
He's a marvelous example of that.
But what you see is that get pushed up the academic tower.
And so you see in the elite schools, like I want to, Professor Johnny Otis is one of the people that
endorses my book on the back, teaches at the advanced, the Center for Advanced Study at Princeton
University and the same place Einstein taught.
That's, that's about as ivory tower as you can get.
I mean, yeah, it's by invite only and you get to study there.
If you've already earned your PhD and they'll invite you and they invite a couple of people a year.
And that's it or every now and then.
And so Bowersock was one of them.
You might have heard of that, that name in the past.
Another highly ivory tower type scholar that's super elite.
So this conversation has been happening at that, at that higher level.
Harvard, some of these places, University of Chicago, Cambridge University.
You'll see the discourse continue through.
But when you get closer to where the culture is at, like say in seminaries.
Right.
Nitty schools.
SPL.
Yeah, there's a SPL for the most part.
It's almost like a novelty to even hear from those people that are steeped in that, that
are presenting it within that.
Yeah.
But this is what I, when I, okay.
So I made a video recently about the Dionysian, not Dionysus, Jesus connections, Dionysian
connection.
I think it's a better term because I'm talking about like the culture of the Dionysus culture
and the way the, the way they run their Ecclesias.
And you know, Clappenborg's written about this as well.
And I, I was surprised because I started the video up with a joke.
The video was an introduction.
It was showing Dan McClellan refute on an online TikToker on the, you know, the Eucharist
being having any, any Dionysian influence.
And I just made a joke and I threw him in there.
And as I'm researching for this video and I'm writing my script and I'm looking for sources
from scholars, I, there's so many that I had to, I couldn't use them all.
There's so much scholarship on this subject.
And what, what, what was so weird to me is Dan, when Dan McClellan talked about it, he
was saying, there's no scholars are talking about this.
Like this is, this is nothing.
Nobody's ever written about this.
I've never heard anything like this.
This is nonsense.
The way, the way he said it.
And I just want to, I'm looking up all these academic journals throughout the, throughout
the years.
There's so much written about this.
And it was like, does he, did he just, does he just reject all this?
Or does he not know about this?
Like what's going on here?
And I just think it's, I just think it's odd when you get a scholar who's very well,
very well accredited like McClellan or Bart Ehrman.
I'm throwing out names that I'm going to get in trouble.
Oh, well, who cares?
He just, you know, you know, no offense to Bart, but like, he wrote an article and it's
still up online.
It's still not corrected where he confuses diogenes with Demetrius.
And it's like, where is, if you're not, we're not even getting names right.
I mean, you're McClellan's, McClellan pronounced semile's name, semile.
Semile.
Wait.
So you're going to, you're going to stamp your foot down on the Dionysian aspects of Christianity.
If you don't even, but how do you not, you don't even know how to say semile.
So how, and all I'm saying is this, I love Bart Ehrman.
I love Dan McClellan.
I love all the stuff they do in New Testament, Old Testament, Hebrew stuff, all that stuff.
But like, if you just, sometimes you don't have to know everything.
If you don't know something, just say, I don't know.
Say, I've never heard anything like, I never heard the Dionysian aspects of Jesus.
It's, this is new to me, but I'm sure, you know, I'm sure there's someone who's written
about, I don't know.
But the way it was like, the way it's shot down, as if we, I know all this, don't even
look there, there's nothing to see here.
Instead of being like, I'm not aware of it.
That's all.
Well, it's a lack of training.
If you think about it, I mean, I'm also an Ehrman fan.
You know, he's got a number of insights that have been helpful.
And some, in some ways we run parallel and in certain regards, he went to Princeton
Seminary.
I did as well.
But he's purely trained within the theological kind of training.
That's your type of, type of scholarship.
This is the most conservative guy that's Bennett, Princeton Seminary, that I know of.
I met him before he passed away.
Super nice guy, but let's get on this.
That does not amount to a secular training in ancient history.
It's, it was a theological training within the Presbyterian tradition that they offer
there.
And it is, it is significant.
And you do learn a lot there, but to say that that's going to then qualify you to speak
on everything, you know, within the broader classical Mediterranean world.
I think that requires more study and not that he's not capable of that and not be even
pick on Bart, but he's, he's kind of representation of a larger phenomenology within the field
where you've got these people that are trained at the Bindi schools and at seminaries all up
and down that are at least weighing in heavily to where the, the, the central for us, the
discourse are at and what, what we're going to say is normal or mainstream or acceptable.
And so this idea of dismissing out of hand, whole categories of study.
That's not what would be going on if this were a secular, you know, if this were ran as a
secular topic and not a theological topic, but as a secular where historians and literary
scholars studying another topic within antiquity, that would not be going on at all.
And so our field is in morbid isolation from the secular humanities.
And so we don't have to, we're not playing by the same rules as the rest of the academic
world.
And I don't think we're as honest and that's not to pick on any particular person.
I had to fight my way out of that all the way out to the end of my education to get out of it
because I was trained at those same places and I had to finally for the last, you know,
last several years of my education, just, you know, leading to get, get a UCLA and all these
different places trying to get out of the Divinity schools and get into the classics departments
to learn everything I can about that ancient world.
And so I think that's, that's the problem is that you're, we're there.
Also, it's, it's a lot of work.
It deconstructs the New Testament in so many ways.
It's dangerous.
We live in a society that doesn't want all of this overturned.
This, this is the living religion.
I mean, in some ways, in some ways it's affecting like on a large scale, the war in Israel anyway,
because people who support, I'm not, I'm not going to get political right now.
I'm not, I don't want you to either.
But like, there are people who are influencing or supporting certain things happening in the world
that are very detrimental to people due to religious belief.
It's absolutely the case.
Yeah.
And people hold, this is sacred history.
It's not just history.
It's sacred history in the minds of so many people.
It's not for me.
For me, it's, it's a very interesting to, I could get as much out of reading about Apollonius of Diana as I do about
reading something out of Paul or some other place or place works.
I could sit down if I want to, you know, personal kind of satisfaction or devotional kind of moment.
I could read just about anything in the ancient world and just and find enrichment.
But for most society, I'm unique that way.
I don't see myself as normal in that.
Even though I ought to, I ought to see myself as normal in that way because it really is.
When you have people to get through seminary, they have to sign a statement of faith.
What you've done now, and this is something that still happens today in some of these seminaries,
they have to sign a statement of faith to get their certificate or degree or whatever.
And what you're doing is you're forcing them to lie no matter what.
Either they have to lie for Jesus to promote Christianity or they have to lie against the statement of faith that they just signed.
This is so horrible.
Why is this even still happening?
It's beyond my, beyond anything I can imagine.
And this is what I mean about like some of these dogmatic attitudes that we find in some of these circles of biblical scholarship are,
they do have like a major impact on the world and some of this stuff happening because of your,
your, your upholding, even if you're a critical scholar that rejects all, all miracles,
but you're willing to just, just grant all the historicity parts.
Like, yes, you see this with Bart a lot.
Like, if it says it in the story, if we can't prove it otherwise, it probably happened then.
It's kind of like, it seems like that's kind of like his, his attitude towards the text.
Joseph probably was Jesus's father.
Okay, whatever.
Like, we're like, what, I'm not saying, like, I'm not, I'm not even like saying he's wrong, but I'm saying like,
there's a lot of stuff that are assumed just to be true about the text, about the, about the cries of Christianity,
that otherwise should, you think it should be more, more rigorous approach to this stuff.
But then when it comes to like what we're talking about, when we're talking about the broader influences on this religion,
now all of a sudden the burden of proof is higher and you need more, like, it's almost like, I don't know how to explain this, right?
It's almost like certain things are accepted easily and other things are rejected and are not accepted as easy,
based on the sort of attitude of biblical scholarship itself.
And I think that goes, and a lot of the more conservative side of biblical scholarship, they sort of push that forward and it sort of gets,
and even the liberal scholar sort of kind of go along with it, it seems like.
Well, yeah.
Okay, so even the entire discourse is, is, is, is different in that regard.
I mean, this whole conservative, liberal, and then I don't know what I'm supposed to be secular or some,
we're just desparados up to the end of the discourse.
Really, I'm just practicing the, all of the tools that I've learned in the trade, in terms of classical, any kind of,
any per, anybody that's trying to investigate and describe classical antiquity in a secular kind of context, those,
that's, that's what I'm bringing to this.
I'm not trying to disturb anybody's faith necessarily, or anything like that.
But I do want to go back and give these texts the same dignity that we would afford them in any other topic, right?
Yeah.
So, and use the same, the same measuring sticks, the same tools, the same methodologies.
We don't assume Socrates said all this stuff that Plato's making him say.
We go, wait, Plato making Socrates say this?
Is this something that fits the data?
Let's compare it to what the other writer who writes about Socrates,
what we can compare them, how they present Socrates and they're different.
Like, okay, is Plato making Socrates say this?
Is he turning Socrates into this specific character?
Why isn't that same approach happening to New Testament?
Wait a minute.
Is the author making Jesus say this?
Or is this really, it seems like that's, seems like the approach on which,
how much we give credence to the story of the New Testament is a lot different
than what we, what we would do in other aspects of different texts.
Well, it's the sociology of it all.
And that's really kind of, you talk to people that are out on the end of this,
out on the edges, studying classics, and we are an odd bunch.
You know, we're kind of porcupines.
You're talking like Carrier or Litwa or, you know, Robin Faith Walsh is not a porcupine.
She's a great example of somebody that tries to get along with everyone.
But she gets much better too.
She does, she does.
And Dennis McDonald is a wonderful man that's treated people very well throughout his career,
but he gets treated horribly back by so many, even though his intellectual pedigree is hard to match.
Right.
You know, Harvard trained all the way up the board.
We're talking about somebody that's highly skilled and qualified to talk on these topics,
and yet he's pushed to the margins.
And so that's-
And the criticisms they get, the criticisms they get are not valid.
They don't actually check and read the stuff that they're talking about.
They just say, huh, I've never heard that yet.
That can't be right.
Right.
A seminary I went to, I'd never heard anything like that.
That can't be true.
That's bizarre.
That's the sort of-
Right.
That's the sort of mentality that I'm noticing when it comes to the pushback against the Robin-
Robin Faith Walsh's and Dennis McDonald's.
It's almost like there's no-
The pushback is just, uh-uh.
Well, it's fallacy.
Yeah.
The idea that I see this all the time online.
I'll see people mention some of the people that you've listed in there or more myself,
even in other contexts.
It's, um, well, that's not the mainstream view or, you know, they're very, you know,
no one, very few have embraced that theory or something like this.
As if that's a fallacy.
That's a fallacious kind of thought.
Yeah.
I can't tell you how many times I've heard people say, that's not the consensus.
Okay.
And is that, is that, is the consensus true?
Right.
Look at the argument.
Let's deal.
Let's look at the text.
Is this a plausible, even if you don't believe it?
Is it plausible?
Let's start there.
Right.
And the very least, Dennis McDonald and Robin Faith Wallace, the stuff they're saying,
beyond plausible.
It's absolutely plausible.
So like, you can't even say it's not plausible, even if you think it's wrong.
But they, they act like it's just like impossible.
This can't be true.
I never heard this.
I was never trained this way.
It's like, it's just be, it goes outside of the scope of, of the sort of mentality of,
of New Testament scholarship.
My work is, is even given a worse treatment in some ways.
I mean, I've had many, many, I mean, it's required reading in Harvard last time I checked.
At least it used to be.
And there are a number of places where it is taken very seriously in certain circles,
especially in the high academies.
But largely it's, it's seen as a, you know, that I must be just off out into outer space
doing my own thing.
And really what's going on there.
I mean, I've, if you, if you look at it, so I'm doing memesis criticism a lot like Dennis
in some ways, but it's cultural rather than literary.
That's my kind of methodological lens throughout the book.
And, but also what is the other thing?
It's dismantling tacitly.
Now it wasn't my aim necessarily, but it's tacitly dismantling the reason anyone's even
reading the New Testament to begin with, for the most part, and that is because of this
hope for afterlife or survival of death.
And in, in, in some ways, if you, if you, if my, if I'm correct in there all the way
across that particular perspective, and I am just, just to give you that confidence
from my side, I am correct that that, that should be, and it was the interpretation.
That's how these texts were received originally.
Then you have to concede that this was mythology or mythmaking in some way and that it was
cultic, cult for that.
They was using the same cultic raw materials that were available at that time to build
an early cult.
It wasn't, they weren't trying to create a, a this really happened kind of movement.
They were creating a cultic movement with cultic storytelling with a founder and that
was mythologized as, as Pliny says in his texts that, that they were singing hymns to
him as, as to a God, which was, you know, within that's, that's the categories that,
that, that they were able to conceive of this.
And that was the very categories that had sprung up.
And so if you think about that, that even biases and even one step further for me where
most of SPL could never accept my thesis out of hand.
They don't even, before they even open the book.
Well, you want to know what, want to know what it is.
I think when, when somebody writes a book and they put it out there and it gets accepted
and becomes part of their, it becomes a part of their identity is like, this is the, this
is their, but when you write something and it goes and it pushes up, pushes up against
some of their stuff, they, it's almost like they have to reject it.
Cause that this is my identity.
They're dealing with, they're going to, they're going to make me look like a fraud.
If he's right now, I'm wrong.
I'm a fraud.
So you have, you have a monetary, there's like monetary reasons behind it, not just monetary,
but there's, there's reasons why people automatically will shut down.
If, if you're saying something that goes against what they've been saying and they're, and they're
supposed to be the expert and you're going against that, they're going to, they're, they're
naturally going to, naturally going to try to find ways to shut it down.
You almost can't blame them.
If Dennis is right, I mean, going back to him, if he's right, that Homeric and Mimesis
and, and other Mimesis in the New Testament is rampant or even occurring at all a whole
lot, then that means that almost every commentary, pretty much every commentary that's been
written up to this point in modern academic work on the New Testament needs to be pretty
much probably thrown in the waste can.
It's, it's so far off at that point that we don't even know what we're doing.
And so, yeah, and that's for people to admit that, think about this, you go and you get
your PhD and then you come out the other end and you're presented with something that's
so far outside of anything you were trained in.
Yeah, that's what I, that's what I think is the main driving force behind the pushback
is you get people who go to school for eight to 10 years, they get a PhD in theology and
religions and then they, that whole entire time that they were in seminary and they learn
what they learned and they're, they're being trained to only look at this area right here.
Look at the density schools, look at this, look at the Septuagint, look at the Old Testament,
look at the Maserati texts and that's their world.
And then they, a couple of years down the road, you know, they write some academic articles,
they get, they get their name out there, they're, they're a real professional scholar now.
All of a sudden somebody comes along and says something completely opposite, completely different.
Imagine that, you'd be like, I've never heard anything like this, this can't be true.
Because if it's true, I would have heard it in my years of going to seminary.
Well, sorry, but that's not the way it works.
Either the data suggests, the data is there or it's not.
So we need to like start off as, as what they're saying, even plausible at first.
If it is, then you should look at it.
Right, that's what my, my whole, my, my whole theory that I ran with in book, you know,
that basically the translation fable, it's, you really have to take a fresh run at it.
I had to get to the, I got to the point when I was writing it, I started, in my mind,
I was having all of these arguments with all of the supposed leading scholars of our time.
They were New Testament folks.
And I got to the point where I was just, it was just maddening.
I just thought, you know what, that's a waste.
None of them have studied Plutar.
They don't know any of this.
They haven't studied this sufficiently.
So for me to have this long involved conversation with people that don't even know.
They're not even looking at it.
They're just assuming that if their, if their favorite scholar or their, the academics that they look up to,
if they're not saying this, then it can't be true.
Right.
It's like this weird dog.
It's like this weird dogma.
I think dogma is the best word to put it because they're not actually engaging with the material.
They're just, they're just engaging with it with a, well, I never heard that yet.
So that can't be real.
If this person doesn't agree, then I don't agree.
Right.
So I don't even have to read.
I'm not even going to read the past that he's, that he's highlighting.
I'm not even going to look at that Greek.
I'm not even going to do this.
I'm just going to assume that he's wrong because this person said he was wrong and sort of this person.
It starts, it starts a whole domino effect.
And next thing you know, you have a whole consensus of scholars saying that you're wrong.
The consensus says that Richard Miller is wrong.
I'm not saying that's happening, but I'm saying like that's, that's what comes out of it.
When one person just outright denying it and that person being on top of a pyramid of scholars under that person,
and they're all just going to follow suit.
And that's just that to me, it seems like that's what's happening a lot.
You become a symbol.
I mean, people carry around in their minds, usually these little like caricatures and little cocktail neck and sketches of what somebody,
if you go back and read Rudolph Wolfman, he doesn't look a lot like the cocktail neck and sketch of what people, you know,
he's kind of a poogie man in so many, you know, religious training context.
But if you go back and actually read him, you know, it's not like the same thing with Dennis McDonald.
You go back and read him.
I've talked to a number of people that, you know, rejected him out of hand when read his book and that, oh, okay.
Yeah, this is compelling.
That's right.
Some of these earlier scholars that I've since been built upon, but also like rejected, you know, the France Cumans of the, you know,
the Mithraic studies, you got James Fraser, you have, and then they get lumped.
So these people, I'm not saying that these people are correct in everything they said, they said a lot of stuff that I would disagree with.
But they get lumped in with like the DuPuis and the, like the really bad mythocyst type stuff from the 18th, 19th centuries, early 20th centuries.
And they just all get lumped in together.
And like, but like, if you actually read France Cumans, most of the stuff he's putting down is legit.
He's like the greatest Mithraic scholar prior to ever live.
And then James Fraser, he gets a lot of crap for some of the stuff that people just like, oh, that's James Fraser type of stuff.
What's so bad about James Fraser?
I mean, yeah, his stuff's outdated.
Yeah, it's older, but it's pretty good if you read it.
Right.
I won't say that about DuPuis.
DuPuis, that book is trash.
That book is horrible.
It's just taking stuff up out of the thin air.
So I do get, I do understand why there is some pushback against outdated material, but it almost seems, I don't know that you get, you get the point.
Yeah, I think that it's, it's for lack of knowledge, it's kind of contempt prior to investigation.
And, and also what would it, you know, if you've got people that are predicating their careers on their social kind of positioning within the larger topography.
Of this field, this career.
Why hazard that by hitching your, your career to a bunch of work that potentially threatens your reputation threatens your, your student reviews.
It, it isolates you or, you know, put you off on the margins, you're going to become pariah.
This kind of thing.
Why do that?
Well, the reason you do it is because you're supposed to be a scholar and not somebody that's playing a social game with your career.
But unfortunately, that's mostly what's going on with this because it is a social religion.
There's heresy.
There's orthodoxy.
There's all of these different paradigms and the winds that govern that even within the larger trust of Western academic history and ecclesiastical history are determining a lot of this, even the language that we use.
Like we went back to Pagan, this idea, Pagans.
There's so much more than that.
What's biblical Greek?
You know, that's not, it's not a thing.
It's made up.
Yeah, biblical lexicon.
What is that?
It doesn't exist.
There was no such thing.
So it's, we're putting, we're drawing these lines and a lot of that is, is coming out.
We're inheriting that from a larger power discourse.
Why are there even New Testament scholars at all?
Why, why would there be this group that's certified to be able to speak on this topic as if it were different than earliest?
This is just earliest Christian literature.
Why isn't, why aren't these just early Christian scholars?
Why aren't they just classes?
You know, right?
It should be Mediterranean, Mediterranean religions with like my main focus being New Testament or something.
Right.
It goes back to Foucault.
Yeah.
It goes back to Foucault and the kind of the way we, the power lines that we draw, the power discourse and the way that we divide up, who gets to speak on what.
And those are all arbitrary lines that don't have, they're actually bringing about violence and vandalizing the discussion.
And they're not helpful.
And so.
Yeah.
I mean, this has been a great conversation so far.
I couldn't agree more.
It's good to see that, like, because I can't determine that I'm correct and they're wrong.
Because as someone who's not trained, and I've only been really like going at this for a few years to probably three to four years now, like really, really like very much like doing it on a regular basis every day pretty much.
Learning Greek, learning a little bit of Hebrew, reading the sources.
And my main thing is more, I do read academic articles.
I shouldn't say I don't, but I love to read the primary sources the most.
Now, for me, I can't determine that I know things and they're wrong.
I have to like, I have to assume that I could have holes in my own thinking, and maybe they're correct.
And I just haven't gotten to where they're at yet.
But when I see people like you and Dennis McDonald and Robin, you know, just not even just just classics departments and Egyptologists that have the same sort of.
I was talking to Egyptologists recently, who was like mind blown that Christians don't talk about Halaria more.
Halaria was a festival that was celebrated all across the Mediterranean around the winter at the time of the spring equinox.
And it's a resurrection festival.
So it doesn't mean that Jesus didn't exist.
And this is all what I'm saying, like that motif or that sort of influence could have had some influence on.
I'm just saying like, this is what Egyptologists and the Egyptologists was very humble about it and saying, well, I'm not a New Testament scholar, so they probably had the reasons.
But it just seems like to me, it seems like there's something going on here.
And I'm just thinking imagine if somebody you put that together with some of the stuff that people are learning in New Testament, there might be something to look at here.
I'm just just an example.
Well, I'll go ahead and say it.
They are wrong. They should be studying these things.
They ought to be out there in studying the heck out of it.
If you're going to claim to be an expert in something, then you should go ahead and invest yourselves in immersing yourselves in the ancient thought world of where these texts got their traction.
Where were the communities at?
These were the cultural hubs of the ancient classical Mediterranean world, the ancient Roman world.
And yet very few in our field really have anything approaching a vivid understanding of those contexts in any way, in any form.
And so it's very rare, actually.
And so that to me is embarrassing.
It's embarrassing to the field.
And that's why classicists don't show up to SBL.
That's why literary scholars aren't showing up to SBL.
That's why a lot of these Assyrian, Assyriologists, ancient Near Eastern studies folks aren't showing up to SBL a lot.
They don't see this as a safe, as a normal place where they could set up a shop and have discussions about the ancient world in any kind of honest context.
Because they're around people that aren't trained in that way.
And it's a loaded topic.
It's full of all sorts of people that are there.
Most of the people at SBL are there because they're on some sort of religious pilgrimage.
And that's why they got their education to begin with.
And this is just where they happened to be, where it all got to at this point.
And so that's not everyone, but that's a lot of it.
And so that's not happening in any other field.
No other field is described that way.
And so I guess the closest you can get would be politics or something like that, or that's also highly loaded and charged topic.
But, you know, I don't think there's anything else really that comes close to what's going on with this discourse.
And so, you know, it's funny you said that because if we were looking at religions in India, they're all on the same language Sanskrit.
They're in the same geographical location, and they have the same sort of similar stories going on.
There's some overlap here.
We would, okay, we would already be dissecting it and looking at stuff and comparing them all.
But for some reason, in this region of Asia Minor and Greece, where Constantinople is, where Byzantium was,
we can't assume that the religions that precede Christianity in that region have any effect on the culture.
We're just going to assume that they just rejected their ancestors' culture and started a new thing there.
You would never do that anywhere else.
It's only in this part of the world where we assume that this special religion has got a force field around it,
and there's no influence from anywhere.
Even if it's the same geographical location, the same language using the same motifs and imagery and symbolism and all that stuff.
Right.
No, it goes beyond absurdity, really, if you think about it from much at all.
When I wrote, I decided that I was going to write for a future generation where this was not the case.
I had this persona in my mind.
How could my book be respected, like say, in 50 years?
Say we get past this, and our field is more secular, it's more true to the humanities and the normal processes and rigor that you could put around any other topic.
I had to try and aim for that as future readers, when they read my work, will they find it true and honest and compelling and correct and helpful, etc.
And so I decided to target that as kind of my readership for the book.
And that's a shame, because largely it has to do with, there's all sorts of reasons for that.
SPL invites just about anyone to go and be participant.
There's almost no constraints on anything that goes on there.
And so I heard one fellow gay that got up and gave a discussion on how true all the miracle, now we know that the miracles in the New Testament really happened.
And here's the proof of it.
And he got a standing ovation.
Of course.
Yeah, standing ovation. And I thought, okay, well, first, that's not true, because my own training and study shows that this would have been part and parcel with other ancient miracle and Mirabilia tales of the ancient.
So first off, they're driving the conversation a completely faith interested direction.
And, and secondly, and what other, in what other contexts, what are their academic context, it'd be like going to the British, you know, the Royal Royal Society and having, you know, they're, they're meeting their annual meeting and they're
talking about King Arthur and somebody gets up and talks about the historicity of Merlin, or something like this, and everyone gives a standing ovation.
It's really our time. It's an embarrassing time. And if you, I think future generations will look back on us and see what we've done, we basically, we're funding the academic legitimation of our own mythosystem.
Right.
And then that, and then like I said, and that in turn plays a huge role in a lot of things that happened throughout the world.
As a result, they're like, upholding some things that are that are affecting world events.
That's right. That's right. This is actually at risk. The future, the it's an existential threat by, by, you know, by possible relation, it's an exit, it produces a certain existential threats to our own species, in some ways, to not have clarity on these
issues is embarrassing.
Yep.
Well said.
Yeah.
So I just want to throw, throw out another link. There's links in the description for the book, resurrection and reception early Christianity, any other projects you got coming up coming up that you want to promote right now.
Well, I'm working on a book that has to do with the criminal aspects of earliest Christianity, you know, why are people getting thrown into prison and killed and so forth. Is it just because the Roman for monsters and all these trials were rigged and kangaroo trials and all that or were there actual laws being broken?
And maybe even intentionally being broken. And, and so it complicates the picture in some ways of the innocent kind of birth of Christianity. But I think that's another one I my tendency is to look where no one else is going the taboo topic, because that's where
usually the treasure's at. That's where the insights are at that haven't been really explored yet that really do balance picture and give it a lot more, make it a lot more true to the actual ancient world and and the rise of the religion.
So that's something that I'm exploring right now. I'm reaching out to other scholars and maybe maybe a joint project. And so if any of your viewers get excited about the topic.
Sounds great. And once again, this is a great discussion. Thanks for coming on and you have to take true noses.
Yeah.